AUTHENTICATION QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
====================================

1. Access tokens and refresh tokens

An access token is a short-lived JWT used to access protected API endpoints.
In this application, the frontend sends it in the HTTP Authorization header:

    Authorization: Bearer <access-token>

The backend checks this token on routes such as the cart, orders, and /api/me.
The access token expires after 15 minutes.

A refresh token is a longer-lived JWT used only to request a new access token.
It is sent to the /api/refresh endpoint, which is protected with
@jwt_required(refresh=True). In this application, the refresh token expires
after 7 days and is not used for normal API requests.

The expiry lengths are different for security and usability. If a short-lived
access token is stolen, the attacker can use it only for a limited time. The
longer refresh-token lifetime means the user does not have to log in again
every 15 minutes. Keeping the refresh token separate also allows the server
to issue a new access token without asking the user for their password again.


2. Axios interceptors

An Axios interceptor is a function that runs automatically before a request or
after a response. This application has two relevant interceptors:

* The request interceptor reads the access token from localStorage and adds
  the Authorization header to every API request.
* The response interceptor handles errors from API responses, especially HTTP
  401 responses caused by an expired access token.

Without an interceptor, every API call would need repeated code like this:

    api.get("/products", {
      headers: { Authorization: `Bearer ${token}` },
    });

The interceptor is better here because authentication is centralized in one
place. Every current and future API call gets the same header automatically,
which removes duplication and reduces the chance that one request forgets the
token or uses outdated authentication logic. It also provides one common place
to refresh an expired token and handle failed authentication.


3. What happens when the access token expires mid-session?

The exact sequence in frontend/src/services/api.js is:

1. The user makes an API request through the shared Axios instance named api.
2. The request interceptor reads access_token from localStorage and adds it
   as a Bearer token in the Authorization header.
3. If the access token has expired, Flask-JWT-Extended rejects the request
   with HTTP 401.
4. The response interceptor receives the error and stores the failed request
   in original = error.config.
5. It checks that the status is 401 and that original._retry is not already
   set. This prevents an endless retry loop.
6. It sets original._retry = true and reads the refresh token from
   localStorage.
7. If there is no refresh token, the refresh attempt fails immediately.
8. Otherwise, the interceptor sends POST /api/refresh with the refresh token
   in its Authorization header. The refresh request uses the base Axios
   function, so it does not recursively pass through the api interceptor.
9. Flask verifies that the refresh token is valid, has not expired, and is a
   refresh token. The backend then returns a new access_token.
10. The frontend stores the new access token in localStorage.
11. It updates original.headers.Authorization with the new token and retries
    the original request by calling api(original).
12. If the retry succeeds, the original API call appears to the user as a
    normal successful request.
13. If refreshing or retrying fails, the interceptor removes both access and
    refresh tokens, removes the legacy token keys, redirects the browser to
    /login, and rejects the original error.

Therefore, a still-valid refresh token normally lets the user continue without
seeing a login screen. If the refresh token has also expired, the user must
log in again.


4. JWT authentication versus Flask session authentication

With Flask session authentication, the server stores login state in a session
and sends the browser a session cookie. The browser automatically sends that
cookie on matching requests, and the server reads the session on each request.
The server must maintain session state, or use a shared session store when the
application runs on multiple server instances. Cross-origin requests also
need careful cookie, CORS, and CSRF configuration.

With JWT authentication, the server issues signed tokens containing the
identity and claims needed to authenticate the request. The client sends the
access token explicitly in the Authorization header. The backend can verify
the signature and expiration without looking up a server-side login session.

JWT is a good fit for this React single-page application because:

* React communicates with Flask as a separate JSON API.
* The Authorization header makes authentication explicit for fetch and Axios
  requests.
* The API does not need to keep a server-side session for every browser.
* Stateless verification is convenient when API servers are scaled across
  multiple instances.
* The access-token and refresh-token design gives short request credentials
  while keeping the user signed in for several days.

JWT is not automatically better for every website. Traditional Flask sessions
are often simpler for server-rendered pages and can be very secure when cookie
and CSRF protections are configured correctly. JWT is better for this project
because its frontend and backend are separate and the frontend needs a clear,
header-based authentication protocol for API calls.


5. Updating the Navbar after a name or avatar change

After a profile or avatar update succeeds, ProfilePage calls updateUser with
the updated user object returned by the API. updateUser updates the user state
held in AuthContext. The Navbar (StoreLayout) reads that same context value, so
React rerenders it with the new name or avatar as soon as the state changes;
there is no need to reload the page. The React concept that makes this possible
is state-driven rendering, with shared state provided through Context.


6. Why verify the current password before changing it?

The server checks the submitted current password against the stored password
hash before replacing it. This confirms that the person changing the password
knows the account's existing credential, which helps protect an account when a
device is left signed in or an authenticated session is taken over. If this
check were skipped, someone with temporary access to an active session could
change the password and lock out the account owner.


7. Why does a wrong current password return 401 instead of 400?

The request can be correctly formatted and contain all required fields, so it
is not a malformed-request error (400). A wrong current password means the
provided credentials do not authenticate the user for this sensitive action.
HTTP 401 indicates an authentication failure, which is why the password-change
route returns 401 for this case. The route returns 400 for input validation
problems such as mismatched new-password confirmation or a new password that
is too short.


8. Purpose of updateUser in AuthContext

updateUser merges updated user fields into the current user object in
AuthContext using React state. ProfilePage calls it after loading or saving a
profile and after uploading an avatar. Any component that reads the context,
including the Navbar, then sees the latest user data and rerenders immediately.
It keeps shared user data consistent across the app without a page refresh or
another login.